# Menachem's Programming Tutorial

This introductory tutorial to programming and programming languages is based on
the tutorial that I would have liked to see when I was learning these topics.

I find that most tutorials try to teach too much, at the wrong pace, or start
off with the wrong things.  My model for the perfect tutorial is the first
chapter of "The C Programming Language" [K&R2, 1988].  It contains a rundown of
all the major features of the language: basic source code structure, variables,
expressions, flow control, basic input/output, functions, strings (character
arrays), and even external (public) variables and linkage.  It also provides a
glimpse of many other features not described in the tutorial, such as pointers
and the rest of the standard library.  The rest of the book, small as it is,
fleshes out these features in detail.  The audience of the book includes people
that already know how to program in other languages, as well as people that are
learning to program using C as their first language.

In this tutorial, I'm going to try emulate that example.  For each programming
language in the tutorial, there is a single page summarizing its basic
features, code structure, and capabilities.  The basic idea is that someone
familiar with programming in other languages can use this tutorial to quickly
write a rudimentary program in a new language.  Does a specific task at your
job require you to work in a particular language?  So long as it isn't too
complex, the tutorial page for that language should be enough to help you out.

Accompanying the language tutorials are a number of essays describing
programming concepts in a language-agnostic manner.  Beginning with "What is
Programming", I'm going to explain concepts as simply and as generally as I
can.  These will generally be concepts that are common to many (or most)
programming languages, often implemented in similar but subtly different ways
or with different names for essentially the same ideas.

# About the Author
I learned about programming from reading books about it as a kid.  I started
with QBasic (a Microsoft variant of BASIC, available on MS-DOS 5), and went on
from there to x86 Assembly, to C, to C++, to Java, to other languages I picked
up on the way, for personal and professional use.  I've worked more with some
than with others, and my professional experience has been nearly entirely Java
and several of its related technologies.

Like Steve Rogers, I'm from Brooklyn.
